So if we could take our seats.
We'd like to get ready
for the next session.
This is always a popular
session with a very lively Q&A.
And so I would like to introduce
Brian Fitzpatrick and Rich Flewelling,
optimizing WebObjects applications.
Thanks Bob.
It's always nice to present
this sort of advanced session.
We get some people who have been
with WebObjects for quite a while.
And although some of the
material can be a little bit dry,
so Rich and I have got a
stack of t-shirts we want to
give away here for starters.
And since some of you people have been
with WebObjects for a really long time,
we're going to start off with
a little question and answer,
multiple choice.
So when you see the answer that you think
is the proper answer to this question,
I want to hear you start clapping
and Rich is going to determine
who answered the question right.
And then we're going
to whip out a t-shirt.
So first, what was the name of the event
where WebObjects was introduced?
Was it A, Web Hysteria?
Web Mania?
Webaholics Anonymous or D, WebWorld.
I think I only heard one person.
I heard one.
I think it might have been in this area.
The answer is B, WebMania.
Next question.
Now this is actually more
related to optimizing your app.
How many classes load when you
start your WebObjects application?
1 to 100, 101 to 1,000.
1001 to 2000.
All of them.
Again, the correct answer is C,
1,001 to 2,000 classes.
Center?
In the center over there.
Next question, what's the longest method
name in WebObjects?
Is it the ever popular add object to
both sides of relationship with key?
No?
Is it the delegate method?
Database context will run login
panel to open database channel.
is the other delegate method.
Adapter channels should construct
stored procedure return values.
Or the often obscure, rarely called,
object store coordinator should wait...
I'll go ahead and let the
translators catch up on that one.
I'll go in this section.
You guys haven't had one yet.
Oh, empty row.
Whoever can get it first.
What's that?
Whoever can get it first?
Yep.
Let them fight over it in the back.
We have two more questions.
What's in Bob Frazier's backpack?
Is it A WebObjects marketing plan?
Is it B, a ham sandwich?
Is it C, Steve Heyman's shirt?
Or is it D, another hat?
What do you think?
I don't know.
I wasn't... I'll go left side here.
A little bit over there maybe this time?
Oh!
And our last question
before we get started.
What is the most popular
error that EO Modeler throws?
Is it A, selector not found?
B, NS internal inconsistency error?
C, NSMutableArray, index out of bounds.
Or D, NSBoy, I really hope you saved
this a few minutes ago.
You've got a pretty good arm there.
Not bad, huh?
Not bad at all.
Now I'm going to turn it over
to Rich Flewelling to talk.
Let's get you started
on the optimization.
Okay, so now to bring it down a little
bit and a little bit more cerebral,
I guess.
What we're going to talk about today
is to find and eliminate performance
bottlenecks within your application.
And the main areas that we're going
to look at is what are the tools that
WebObjects gives you out of the box to
help you identify any trouble spots.
If you look at the architecture of
a typical WebObjects application,
where are some of the bottlenecks
that typically pop up,
and how can you go about
eliminating those problems?
So what we'll be doing today is
looking at when is the right time
within the application development
lifecycle to go about investing
your time in performance tuning.
Looking at WoE Event Center which
comes with WebObjects to help you
go about and tune your application.
And a third-party tool from
Borland called OptimizeIt that
also can help you in this regard.
And we'll also be looking at,
specifically within the
application server tier,
at the WebObjects and
EnterpriseObjects frameworks.
Techniques of using the
software that we give you,
techniques that help you
improve the overall performance
of the application server.
And once you've done all that,
there are times when you actually
just have to upgrade your hardware
and we'll show you some of the
Unix utilities that can help you
identify those problems as well.
So first of all,
when should you start tuning when
you're developing an application?
You probably don't want to start tuning
your application early on because you
really have a bunch of functionality
that the users are looking for to be
implemented in the system and make
sure that it's functionally stable.
So functional stability is
the first thing to look for,
but you shouldn't just go out and develop
functionality without thinking about,
well, what's a good design to go about
implementing this so you're
not just fetching things from
a database constantly writing
to various files on the system,
but do things in a way that will give
you 80% of that performance that you
need and then go about tuning it once you
get all the functionality that you want.
So another key piece is to set your
milestones for what you want your system
to perform in terms of benchmarks.
So that way you can go back and
measure and do some optimization,
measure again, and see the progress that
you're actually making.
actually making, if any.
So from the infrastructure
side of the house,
if you have the luxury of
being able to get enough
Hardware and software in place
that can actually mirror what
your deployment environment
would be in a test environment,
that's the ideal because
that way any changes you make
in your test environment,
when you roll it to the
deployment environment,
you'll see the performance
improvements just like you
saw in the test environment.
Likewise,
having a test environment allows
you to eliminate a lot of the
extraneous variables of different
users hitting your system while
you're going through testing.
This allows you to isolate
and test for a specific thing.
On the other side of it,
from the software side of it,
we mentioned earlier that you should
establish some acceptance criteria.
And make these concrete.
Go about and put down some numbers.
For example, all pages should return
in under half a second.
And on this BigQuery search that
we're going about and querying,
the users will accept something in
under 5 seconds or under 10 seconds,
whatever that number is.
But put those in your requirements
documents so that you can then test
for the performance of the system and
come back and verify that your system
is performing like it should be.
And then create some test cases
in your system that will allow you
to exercise these portions of your
application and actually find out if
you are meeting these criteria or not.
So we saw this slide earlier,
and this is one of the most complex
architectures that you could
probably have with a Web application,
but it really points out all the
different places in this chain that
can really become the weakest link
for the performance of your system.
From the time that the user hits
a button on the Web browser and
the request is sent through,
look at all the different hops
this request can go through.
You can go through the Web server tier,
firewalls,
networks between the various tiers,
through your application instances,
perform some kind of functionality,
searches out of the database,
and then the round trip back.
So what we're going to do in the next
few slides is look at each of these tiers
and point out a few tips for things that
would help you get the best performance
out of each of those because ultimately,
wherever your weakest link is in the
system is going to be the weakest link
for the performance of your system.
So keeping all these things tuned as
closely to optimal as possible will
give you the best performance overall.
So let's look at the browser
or the client desktop that
your end users are using.
One of the major factors is
connectivity to the back-end system.
So are they over a dial-up line
or are they on an internal LAN?
Are they on some ISP with
a very fast connection?
Those really have a lot of impact
on just sending the requests
and receiving the requests.
But there's also a big performance impact
on what size of the pages are coming back
to the desktop and what's in those pages.
For example,
are there many images that then,
once the HTML is brought to the browser,
the browser has to go out over the same
connection and pull those things back?
Is there a bunch of JavaScript that's
embedded in your pages that needs to
be parsed and processed on the desktop?
One way to overcome that is
to use cascading style sheets,
which can really help you
limit the amount of HTML.
But that also incurs an overhead
with the browser needing to
parse through those things.
Likewise,
the hardware on the client side can be
affected based on what kind of browsers
and plug-ins are being pulled in.
You might have Flash movies
that are playing.
You might have QuickTime movies.
So all these things are factors
down on the client side.
Overall,
we also need to look at the server
sizing for each of the boxes.
And as you know from
computer science classes,
you have resources of CPU memory, memory,
and disk.
And really the memory is virtual memory.
And you really never want to have to
use the virtual side of that memory.
You want to be able to keep everything
resident in physical memory.
And since we're in a
networked environment,
the network also plays a huge effect.
So what we want to do is make sure that
the processing that we have going on
on each of these servers is using those
resources in the most effective manner.
So there's a couple of
utilities that Unix gives you
and also Mac OS X gives you.
For example, Top, I think Avi mentioned
that in the keynote,
is something that he uses when
he evaluates applications.
And what we're going to do is go through.
I'm going to do a demo.
We're going to go
through the demo machine,
which is demo 4,
and show you we have an application
here for this first demo that will...
Show our need for speed
against the movie schema,
which I'm sure you're
familiar with the example.
In the movie schema,
what we have is a bunch of movies
and the roles of the actors
that were played in that movie,
and so there's an
EO model behind all this.
For this first demo, though,
we're not really using the EO model.
What we're doing is we have something
that will go off and do a ton of
computations in the background,
which we basically are
saying is spamming the CPU.
But first of all,
there's a couple of utilities.
CPU monitor,
if you can see up here in the
right-hand side of the screen,
can show you the usage of the CPU.
And the blue line is user space,
which is where we're running this
application in the background,
and the red is the operating system.
And then I've started up top
with a couple other parameters,
dash U, which gives me a ranking by CPU,
and it's refreshing every five seconds,
and a dash D parameter
on the top command,
and you can look this
up in the man pages,
but that gives you the deltas between the
last snapshot and the current snapshot.
So what we're going to do
is set up a... off this
This is a request.
And you'll see immediately in the
CPU monitor how we've pegged the CPU.
And if you notice here,
The Java application instance,
which is the application
server in this case,
has risen to the top of the
stack of the processes that
are running on this machine.
It's using 87% of the CPU.
The load average on the machine
at the top has really peaked,
and now it's finished processing,
and so the processing
time has come back down.
So this is one of the
tools that you can use.
VMStat is another that allows you to
look at virtual memory and applications.
There's a variety of other tools
as well out on the net that you
can bring over to the platform.
So that's the first demo.
I'm going to turn it over to
Fitz now and I'll be back up
for the third demo after that.
Thanks.
Thanks, Rich.
Got to find my remote control.
Now we're going to talk about a couple
of issues related to your web server
as well as your database server and how
we can profile your app using some of
the tools that come with WebObjects,
namely WoeStats and WoeEventCenter.
So first we have your web server.
Now,
that's something that's often ignored
because you're very focused on the code.
There's a number of different things
you can do with your web server
to increase the performance of it.
You can increase the
RAM and file cache sizes.
Again, as Rich said,
you want to make sure you're never
digging in a swap on a production server.
Because your performance goes down to
zero pretty darn quickly at that point.
Install the biggest,
fastest drives that you can because
if you're going to be reading
data off the drives as well,
serving your web server resources,
static images and the like.
Disable reverse DNS lookups.
This is related to logging.
It takes time for your web server
to go back and look up the name
corresponding to the number
of a request that's coming in.
And important not only for
optimization but security,
you want to make sure you're up to
date on your operating system patches.
I'M GOING TO GO WITH THE
We talked about disabling
reverse lookups.
If your web server, for example, Apache,
is generating logs for every request
and you're never going to use these,
turn it off.
That's the best thing you can do.
You'll increase your performance
and the ability to scale.
If you are going to use it,
see if you can't,
log it to a separate disk or make
sure you're on a fast disk subsystem.
Increase the TCP listen backlog.
Now, basically,
once you start getting many
multiple requests per second,
users are going to start backing up,
not only queuing up in your app,
but queuing up on the
operating system level.
And after a certain point,
the operating system will
start to refuse requests.
So by increasing this,
you can make a longer queue.
It's not going to make it any faster,
but at least the users won't
get the not available or
machine not contacted message.
Use the latest releases of HTTP server.
I'm happy to say that Apache 2.0.36
was released on Tuesday of this week,
and it does compile and run
beautifully on Mac OS X.
And web objects,
the CGI bin adapter does work with it.
However,
we're working on getting other on the,
we call it mod web objects,
working with that.
For additional performance info,
specifically related to Apache,
you can take a look at the
Apache website at the page right there.
Database server.
On the back end,
you've got your database server,
and there's a lot of different
things that you can do to tweak out
your database server to get every
little bit of performance out of it.
A lot of different vendors recommend
particular philosophies with how
to set up your database server,
where to put data files,
what kind of hardware to use,
how to tune memory allocations.
In fact,
Oracle recommends a whole number of
kernel configurations for your machine
to make sure that they can get every
last bit of performance out of it.
Query tuning.
If you turn your database on in
monitoring mode so that you can keep an
eye on what's going on with the database,
you can see what queries are coming in.
What can we do with the database
to make each query go faster?
Do we need another index somewhere?
Your primary keys obviously
should be indexed,
but if you're querying on a
particular attribute often,
you may want to create an index on that.
Cache data into memory.
I've been to some places where
they get this great big beefy
database server with a map.
They've got a massive
amount of RAM in it,
and they manage to squeeze
their entire database into RAM.
That's one way to speed
things up for certain.
Now, application level tuning.
When you're looking at
your WebObjects components,
you want to find out which one's slow.
Obviously,
clicking through the application,
you can find out pretty easily what's
taking the most time out of your app.
However,
Woe Stats is something that's going to
be in your application and you can access
this page to tell you how much time,
down to hundreds of a second,
each page is taking to render,
as well as a minimum, a maximum,
and an average request time.
Woe Event Center can give you
detailed statistics on your app on
the component and the sub-component
level and show you how many times
each sub-component was referred to,
how many times each component was hit.
And lastly,
if database access might be the
thing that's slowing you down,
and Rich is going to talk more about this
in the next demo when he talks about EOF,
batching, and prefetching,
and that sort of thing.
But if you set
EOAdapterDebugEnabled to true,
you can see all the SQL that
is being generated by your
app and sent to the database.
And in addition to that,
WebObjects will have a little timestamp.
It'll say the minute and second that
your requested database started and then
the minute and second that it finished.
So you can see, that'll show you A,
perhaps your one query
is taking a long time.
Or B, perhaps by firing a lot of faults,
you're doing a whole bunch of
round trips to the database,
which is not ever really a good thing.
So, as I said,
we can view the transaction
times via WoeStats,
turn on event recording
in Woe Event Setup.
Now, Woe Event Setup is like an
on-the-fly profiling tool.
Anybody from here from the
Ejective C days remembers GProf.
Crank your,
compile your application with profiling,
crank it up, stop the application,
examine the data.
Well, go to Woe Event Setup, set up the,
tell the application to
log all these events.
And it, it,
WebObjects can log just an absolutely
ridiculous amount of events per second
without a serious performance hit.
And then it'll start monitoring all this.
You can come back to the
Woe Event Display page and
see what it's got to offer.
So this will help you pretty
easily detect which pages don't
meet your acceptance criteria.
You can find out exactly what
the performance problem is.
But remember to evaluate the
times relative to the entire time.
If you have a request
that's taking 10 seconds,
and 8 of those seconds are
because of database fetch,
and 2 of those seconds are
because of a little calculation,
a sort or something
you're doing on the side,
you'd probably do best to
focus on the database fetch.
Focus on the larger of the
two problems in this case.
Now, if I could have the demo
machine back up here.
I'm going to go ahead and do a little
demo here with using WolfStats.
So let's close this up.
We'll come into our application
here and check out demo number two.
And first thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to go into WoEventSetup,
which is password protected.
So we'll log in here.
And you see there's several different
kinds of events that you can
monitor or you can pick up if you're
looking for something in particular.
What I'm going to do
now is set them to all.
We'll take a quick peek at the
event log and you'll see that it's
pretty much just logged the event
of me coming to this very page.
So that being done,
we'll go back into the application.
and what we'll do here
is we'll sort some stuff.
Now,
obviously this is a little contrived.
We know that we're sort-- I'm
hitting this one component.
There's something that's
taking a lot of time.
You can see the CPU is cranking up again.
But--so I have an idea of where to look,
of what's going on.
But when I go look at Woe
Stats or Woe Events Setup,
it's going to tell me
exactly which component,
the name of the component that's taking
so much time to complete and what's
making the expensive calculation here.
Okay, so we sorted 25,000 items and
we took a good chunk of time.
So let's go take a look at Woe Stats.
Log in again.
Now, you'll see at the top,
what stats tells you some
nice information here.
Overall transactions, component action,
how long your app's been up.
It tells you some great information
down here about sessions.
How long have your sessions been idle.
So, and the session stats are
something that can help you
to tune your session timeout,
which is something you should
get as low as possible to avoid
your sessions keeping all the
memory around for that stuff.
Total memory usage.
And now we get down to
what I'm looking for,
the component action stats.
You'll see here,
we have the name of the component,
how many of them are served, the minimum,
average, and maximum time.
So, stats demo.
Okay, there's nothing really
big going on there.
Utils demo that Rich did,
we saw that that was pretty slow.
Wow.
And here, oh, bubble sort.
Okay,
so we probably don't want to be doing
a bubble sort in this application,
so let's go ahead and change
that over to a quick sort.
And we'll save that.
Again, rapid turnaround,
not going to restart the application.
We just go back in,
and we'll try and sort our data again.
Okay,
that was a little bit faster right there.
That's quite an improvement actually.
I think I should get a raise, Rich.
Anyway, WoEventDisplay.
Let's take a quick look at what
WoEventDisplay has to tell us about
all the stuff that's happened here.
Okay, let's open this up.
and we've got all these
different information.
Here's the events it's logged
and here are the comments,
the classes that they come from.
It keeps that information,
how much time it takes and how many times
it was called and relative to the whole.
So if we go in our stats demo
which we were just working on,
you can see that our table
element which contained our
Sorry about that.
Which contained our Aqua button which
invoked the quick sort bubble sort
is what took the most amount of time.
That's Woe Stats and
that's Woe Event Center.
Now what I'm going to do is turn it
back over to Rich to show us a little
bit more about EOF and what you can
do to tune your database access.
Don't forget to restart the app.
So what we're going to do now is
we talked earlier about all the
different application tiers within this
system for a typical WebObjects app.
And what we're going to do now is
focus on the WebObjects app itself.
And as you know,
there's multiple layers that
your software goes through
to talk to any database.
EOF makes it so easy to talk to
databases that we want to leverage
that software that's available,
but we also want to use it
in the most effective manner.
So what are a few things that
we can do for Enterprise Objects
Framework to improve performance?
Well, first and foremost,
make sure that you're not traversing
from your application server to
the database more times than you
really need to to bring in the data
or send the data to the system.
And a couple ways of helping that is
with batch vaulting and prefetching,
and we'll talk about what each
of those techniques bring to the
table in the next few slides.
Another way to go about this is
with the shared editing context.
And how many people know what
a shared editing context is?
Okay, a pretty good number.
And the biggest benefit for the
rest of you is that it allows you
to bring read-only memory into the
application instance one time and
use that across multiple sessions.
So each session within your application
doesn't need to bring in that same
set of data and use it over and over,
for example, in things that don't change
a lot in your application.
Like the pop-up lists,
different browsers, select items.
You want to read that stuff in
once when the application loads and
leverage that throughout the app.
If you have the luxury of making
your application read-only,
that would be a tremendously
fast application because,
again, you could bring most of the things
into a shared editing context,
operate on it there, for example,
in a reporting application.
If you could make everything read-only,
that would be extremely fast.
And ultimately, as I mentioned earlier,
you just want to eliminate the constantly
fetching the same data over and over.
Another way to go about
doing this is using raw rows.
What raw rows allow you to do is
eliminate the overhead of taking
the data from the database and then
turning it into business objects.
This is a great advantage in cases
where you're not going to do a bunch
of changes on that data and then
persisting it down to the database or
leveraging the business logic in the
objects that are resident in WebObjects.
in your application,
but you just want to bring in the data.
For example, reporting, again,
is a great example.
Bring the data in from raw rows,
use it as is, and go on your merry way.
Another thing that you should
use for your application to
protect your application from
users doing huge searches,
searching and trying to bring in all
the data from the database into your
application instance and bloating
memory is to set fetch limits.
For example,
you might determine that for your
application a user really can't operate
on datasets more than 250 records.
It just is unwieldy,
and you want to give them some feedback
on how to restrict that search down.
So fetch limits within
EOF really can help you do that,
and it helps you eliminate unrestricted
searches within your application.
If you have very large object graphs,
making changes to these object
graphs becomes a problem.
What you really want to do is have small
sets of data that are being operated on.
And one way to do that is
with nested editing contexts.
And another is with
peer-to-peer editing contexts.
This allows you to encapsulate
the data that's going to change
and operate on it in a very small,
restricted fashion,
make the changes there,
and then send them to the database
instead of having this very large
set of data that the editing
context is trying to manage.
A couple ways to keep data within
your application from going stale.
And this can happen in a case where,
for example,
you have an admin application that
makes changes to the database and then
you also have an Internet application
that is leveraging that data.
In many cases,
you make changes from the admin
application in the database and you
want that data to be replicated out to
the Internet as quickly as possible.
One way to do that in a brute force
method would be to use invalidate all
objects on the Internet instances.
And what would happen in that case is it
would tell EOF that all these snapshots
within my system are invalid and so next
time somebody comes to access this data,
you need to refetch that data and
bring the snapshots up to speed.
And so that's one way
to go about doing that.
Another way, though, is to,
instead of doing a brute force
method on the entire object graph,
is to bring that into a
more restricted set of EOs,
if possible.
And there's a couple methods that
you can set on a fetch specification.
Set refreshes, refetched objects to true.
And so you create a search,
you bring those data objects in,
and you set that to true,
and that will then refetch that subset.
So instead of working on the
entire data set that you had
in your application instance,
you can restrict that down to,
ultimately,
to things that have actually changed.
Another way to do this is to set a
time lag on the snapshots themselves.
The default value out
of the box is one hour.
That might meet your needs fine,
but in cases where you're making
changes rapidly to the admin side
and you want to see this reflected,
you probably want to bring
that time stamp down.
But understand that the smaller
you bring that time stamp down,
that will cause fetches to the
database to happen more often.
So it's really up to you guys
to determine what's the most
effective for the functionality
you're trying to perform.
So let's go through a demonstration
of batch faulting and prefetching.
Great, we have the demo application up.
First thing I need to do is restart
the application to clear out any of
the changes that were made earlier.
Um, and so that'll just take a second.
And you'll notice that I'm
running everything on this laptop.
So some of the times that you see in the
searches will be pretty large in terms
of seconds because I have the browser,
project builder, the application,
the database,
everything running on this one machine.
So let's go into the application again.
And we're on demo 3.
The first thing we want to do is
go through a couple different fetch
mechanisms against the database.
If you remember earlier,
I mentioned that what we're using is a
movie object and it has a one-to-many
relationship to the roles in that movie.
The first way to go about doing
a fetch is a regular fetch.
Go out, search for a bunch of movies,
and then pull in the
movie roles for that.
If you look at, you can see how long it
took to refetch here,
and if I go down here to update,
You can see that this took 5.65
seconds to return that data set.
And the data set that's returning,
there's about 100 movies and
about 450 rolls for those movies.
And if we look,
I've also turned on SQL debugging.
So what you can see
here is how many times
It has had to go to the
database to do selects,
so let me highlight one here.
What you can see is it's
selecting a movie roll,
and again it's selecting a movie roll,
again it's selecting a movie roll.
So it's going across this
bridge from the database,
or across the network from the database
to the application server many,
many times.
So let's look at a better way to do this,
or one better way to do this.
Batch Vaulting.
Here again you can see in
the background the number of
round trips to the database,
but the performance was
much better in this case.
And we're down to 1.73 seconds.
And so what's happening in this case
is that movies are being selected
and then when I go to fault in the
movie roles for a particular movie,
I also tell the system within EO Modeler
to go off and bring in a batch of
movie roles next time you go across
that when you go to the database.
So I'm telling it to
bring in a set of 20.
And this really cuts down
the round trips from 100...
100 and 1 for the regular fetch down to
about 20 for the batch faulting case.
In the third case,
we can use prefetching.
In this case,
we have the fastest performance
because it's only having to
go to the database two times.
One to get the movies because
we're doing a qualified search,
and then another time to get the
movie rolls for those movies.
We only go to the database twice,
and you can see what the time
is in this case is 0.74 seconds.
To help you compare and
contrast each of these,
we can go through a little
bit more detail about each
of the different fetches.
As you see at the top one,
we do one round trip for the movies and
then one round trip for each fault fired.
That's the slowest performance.
Batch faulting helps you cut
that down by when you go to
the database for the faults,
you say, hey,
give me a collection of those every time
instead of taking them one at a time.
That really helps you
bring down the time.
The last is prefetching.
In this case,
you create a fetch specification.
You create the movies,
and you tell it that I want
to follow a key path.
You then send the movie
to the movie rolls.
In this case,
it brings in the movies and then sends
off one more trip to the database to
pull in all the movie rolls associated
with those in that first collection.
That's why we get the
best time for that case.
There's one other part to this demo,
raw rows.
And we mentioned that earlier that
it's a great use for reporting.
And so if we go off and search,
you can see up in the
right-hand corner here,
we have, pardon?
Thank you.
I need to restart because I already
have cached a bunch of data here.
This will just tell me to
start my session again,
so we'll do that.
Okay, so we're back to the raw rows
part of the demonstration.
And we'll click on the rows.
We bring in 453 movie rolls,
and you can see the time in
that case is 0.44 seconds.
And if we turn that data that
we pull back into objects,
there should be some additional
overhead associated with that,
and that comes back in 0.96 seconds.
When you want to use these,
there's two different scenarios.
One is you just want to
interact with the data itself.
You don't really need the business
logic that the EOs give you.
And the second case is you want to
make a bunch of changes to things
and leverage the business logic.
And so that's when you should incur
the overhead of the 0.96 seconds.
Now remember,
these times are way out of whack
because this is all running on this
one laptop in a real environment.
These would be probably
orders of magnitude smaller.
But it gives you the effect
for what the changes are.
So with that,
I'll turn it back over to Fitz.
Thank you.
Thanks again, Rich.
Now,
I'm going to focus now on a little bit,
a little bit on things
a little bit lower.
Anyone here go to the
Java performance tuning sessions?
Okay, that was a big, real big hit,
I can see.
We're going to talk a little bit
about what you can do down in the
language level to improve your
performance of your application.
And finally,
we're going to talk about bad algorithms.
For example, you saw, you know,
I was sorting 25,000
objects using bubble sort,
which takes a little bit of time.
Memory demands.
Are you pulling tons of objects into
your application that are unnecessary?
Memory leaks.
Do you have circular references?
What can you do to help the garbage
collector out and make it easier for it
to clean up as you run out of memory?
And finally,
which I'm really excited about showing,
is using OptimizeIt to look inside
the Java virtual machine at your app.
Is there anyone here
who's used OptimizeIt?
Can I see a show of hands on that?
Okay, that's great.
Having used OptimizeIt,
it's like you realize that
before that I was just looking
at this blind ball of mud,
which was the JVM,
and I was kind of guessing at what
was happening based on my code.
But now I'm going to show
you how to use OptimizeIt to
look inside the Java virtual
machine and see what's going on.
So improving the performance of your app.
First of all, tune the JVM heap size.
And then test it with the
different deployment environments
that you're going to use.
Remember your development environment,
your laptop or your workstation,
is going to be different than the machine
that you deploy the application on.
The heap size does play an
important role because when
every time that your application
has to increase the heap size,
if it's not at maximum already,
it incurs a small performance penalty
because the garbage collector is going
to run either a little bit or a lot.
One of the things that I recommend
and that a lot of actual vendors
do recommend with Java application
servers is to set the minimum heap
size to the maximum heap size.
The minimum heap size tells your app
what to malloc when it first starts up.
It says grab this big hunk of memory.
The maximum says keep grabbing until
you hit this number and grab no further.
So if that memory is there,
if it's available for your Java app,
it's not going to be
used by anything else.
And it shouldn't because if
it's used by something else,
you may max out and go into swap,
which as we know is death.
So minimum heap size, maximum heap size.
Now in WebObjects 4.5 we had the
nice verbose NSJavaMinHeapSize
and NSJavaMaxHeapSize settings,
which have been deprecated
because now there's no longer an
Objective-C wrapper around your JVM.
We're invoking Java directly.
We're using the -XMS for minimum
size or -XMX for maximum heap size.
They default to 32 and 64,
however you can change
that if you'd like to.
Deployment.
As Rich said earlier,
examine the machine using TOP, VMStat,
or other performance tools.
See how much memory your operating
system is using or any other
tasks running on that machine.
Configure your application
to use whatever's left.
So if you have a machine with a gigabyte
of RAM and your operating system
is using under 100 meg of overhead,
it gives you about 900 meg left,
so you can either give one
instance 900 megabytes or
nine instances 100 megabytes.
Or in the instance of
the Deutsche Bank guys,
your E10K with four terabytes of memory,
you can give 480 instances,
whatever they need.
Setting references to null.
When you're done with an object,
not necessarily in the local scope,
a local variable in a method is the
garbage collector knows it's out of scope
and it will deal with that appropriately.
But fields in your classes,
when you're done with this field,
you know you're done with it,
set it to null.
Make one less reference for the
garbage collector to have to navigate.
Be aware of finalize.
Finalize is something that's
going to happen during or after
garbage collection and there's
a penalty for calling finalize.
It costs more time.
You shouldn't be invoking it explicitly.
Finally, if you must implement finalize,
remember to call super.
Otherwise,
you're going to have some weird problems.
Now, I want to touch a little
bit on garbage collection.
And this is always an
interesting and strange voodoo
behind the garbage collector.
And so I tracked down some
of the JBM guys at Apple this
week and I cornered them.
I said,
so what happens when you call system.gc?
We've been told it's a hint.
And the specification for the
Java virtual machine says that it
doesn't have to run the garbage
collector when you say system.gc.
I've seen bizarre little bits of code.
In fact, I've written some myself that
call the garbage collector.
And then check the free memory
and call it again and check the
free memory and keep doing that.
When you call systems.gc with Apple's
Hotspot VM we ship with Mac OS X,
it does a full garbage collection sweep.
Now that was actually news to me.
I thought it was just a hint.
So when I say full sweep,
that means we're suspending all threads
and then doing a full sweep through
the VM for anything we can get rid of.
That's expensive.
It's time consuming.
There really is no good time to do
a full sweep of your application.
I met a person who said,
why are you so worried about this?
In session terminate?
I call system.gc and
the session's done with.
What's to worry about?
Well, what about the other people?
The sessions are currently running.
We get to sit there while your
garbage collector does its thing.
Now, we have a little demo
here with OptimizeIt.
And just to point out that there is...
There is another application
out there called JProbe,
but Optimizeit runs on
Mac OS X quite well,
I might add,
so we're going to demonstrate that.
Now the first thing I'm
going to point out with this
is-- These guys are so good,
I don't even notice them.
I just assume things have changed,
and it sure did.
When your application starts up,
We've got, you see this massive,
massive line here.
Java, and here you'll see the XMX64,
64 meg Mac, 32 min,
and then some different defaults,
and a whole load of directories
for your class path.
All the frameworks it's going to pull in,
the Java VM framework,
the jar for your application itself.
So what you do with that on, oh,
I'm doing fine.
What you want to do with that is
copy that and create a shell script
and modify that line a little bit.
So we've got right here a little shell
script that I've cobbled together.
[Transcript missing]
It says port is 1470.
Here's a little bit of information
that optimize is telling us.
So what it's saying is we've opened
port 1470 for you to attach with your
optimize it suite to get information
about the running application,
about the JVM.
Now it takes a good bit longer now
because every action is being audited and
all this information is being generated.
So now I've got optimize it
started over here and I'm going
to attach to my running instance.
And in pretty short order,
we're going to see the answer
to one of our questions before.
How many classes does your
application load when it starts up?
Well, first of all,
we've got 21,000 instances of char array.
We have 16,000 strings.
We have enough string
buffers to fill a truck.
And if I scroll down here,
these are all the classes that
we've got loaded in our application.
Notice I'm still scrolling.
Still scrolling.
We've got WebObjects Foundation,
Print Streamlogger, Apache Xerces stuff,
Text Decimal Formats.
And this is one way you can look at
all the instances of your objects.
You can get an idea of how
much memory they're taking,
how many instances you
have of each object.
We can come over here and this
is actually my very favorite
part here and we can find out
how much heap size are we using?
How much is available to us?
How much is used?
What's the garbage collector doing?
How many active threads?
For those of you who say, oh,
my application isn't multi-threaded.
It's impossible to write a WebObjects
application that's not multi-threaded.
You have 24 just from the start.
Didn't do anything special here,
24 threads.
Loaded classes, 1,036.
Did anyone else get
surprised by this number?
I was like, wow, you know,
I knew there was a lot of stuff going on,
but that seems like an
awful lot of information.
So what I'll do now is
I'll kick back to this.
We'll sort by instance count and
we'll go into our running application,
which is going to take a little
bit longer to go through the first
time because it's got a whole lot
more information to be generated.
So, there we are.
This is going to return now.
And we're going to go to demo 4.
Now, I've got a couple of
different things here.
The first thing I'm going to do
is go ahead and leak some memory.
Now, I've set my session timeout to
a really short session timeout.
And so at the end of your session,
obviously,
I've created a whole bunch of objects
and put them in a cache in my session.
And when the session times out,
what this should do is
release those objects.
So, we're going to give this a second
here and the session will time out.
Now,
go back to optimize it and take a look.
if you peek and optimize it real quick
and sort by instance counts here,
we'll see that on the fly it's
picked up some big object.
And we have 15,000 of these that
are taking up quite a bit of RAM.
So, let's check here if this thing
is ever going to terminate.
Did you turn session
termination off on me,
Rich?
You can just cut this out, right?
Should I do the Steve Hayman and say,
bite me, bite me, bite me,
or something like that?
So, there we go.
Our session finally terminated.
Now we'll come back to optimize it.
And notice everything's still here.
Nothing's really changed.
Nothing's been garbage collected.
Why?
The garbage collector
doesn't need to run.
There's a lot of objects that we
can dispose of that we don't need.
So I'm going to run the garbage
collector by hand here and
we'll see some stuff change.
But
[Transcript missing]
We can see where it's allocated.
It's going to pull a backtrace and
walk all the way down the call stack so
you can see where this is referred to.
Way down here, all the way in the
bottom right-hand corner.
Called from key value coding.
So there you are.
Allocation, location, JVM demo leak.
So I'm going to pop into
Project Builder real quick and take
a look at the JVM demo component.
So, specifically, the leak method.
So, we'll take a quick look.
Here's our leak method.
Okay, so,
got a cache session and I'm stuffing all
these objects into this cache object,
cacheMutableArrayInSession.
So, we'll come up here,
we'll take a look at session.
Here's our cache method.
Okay, underscore cache.
Now I can't figure out
why that's leaking yet.
Let's take a look at
the instance variable.
Ah, so there's our answer.
We've declared it statically.
How foolish of us.
So we can go ahead and fix that, save it,
recompile the app,
and it'll go ahead and allocate properly.
So we'll go back here,
and now for the really
fun part that I like,
is run out of memory.
I'm sure no one here has ever had that
problem with the Java virtual machine,
right?
Ever run out of memory?
Okay, what I'm going to do here is start
allocating objects by the thousand.
And they're basically just going to
start consuming the virtual machine
until it's forced to increase the heap.
Remember,
our maximum heap is set to 64 meg.
It's currently using the minimum heap.
In fact, it's not even near that.
In fact,
I'll run the garbage collector and
make sure everything's cleaned up.
Garbage collector did a full sweep,
100% activity.
Over here, about 8 meg used.
So we'll come back to our app,
and I'll say, run out of memory.
And I'll rush back over here.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, full sweep, all the way to the top,
right there.
And we're getting pretty close,
and now we're at the top of our heap.
Slam into it, the garbage collector
runs as hard as it can.
Now this is all happening
inside a WOL component,
so our request handler
is going to handle this,
grab the exception,
and then the garbage collector
successfully deallocates all of those
objects and dumps this back down.
Now look how hard that's running.
That is from time start 5 minutes and
30 seconds to 5 minutes and 50 seconds.
And now we're back down to 8 meg.
So that's my Optimizer demo for you.
I believe that's about it.
Again,
to be considered for the WebObjects beta,
even if you've already
been in a beta before,
you should sign up at
applec.apple.com slash webobjects.
The lab is downstairs.
If you haven't been to the lab,
I recommend going by,
especially if you have one of those
impossible problems that's bugging you.
Bring your laptop down there.
We've got engineers from WebObjects,
engineers from Java who will be
glad to take a look at it for you.
Roadmap.
We have a feedback
session this afternoon,
which I heard is going to
be extremely entertaining,
a feedback session.
Much better than any of those
other feedback sessions that
we'll be having this afternoon.
Who to contact?
You can contact Tony Trujillo-Vian,
Bob Frazier, Apple Professional Services,
which is where Rich and I work.
We give her training, support,
and consulting.
And more information,
we have a whole bunch of URLs.